📖 Document how to change a ClusterClass (#5978)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/book/src/tasks/experimental-features/cluster-class/change-clusterclass.md

# Changing a ClusterClass

## Selecting a strategy

When planning a change to a ClusterClass, users should always take into consideration
how those changes might impact the existing Clusters already using the ClusterClass, if any.

There are two strategies for defining how a ClusterClass change rolls out to existing Clusters: 

- Roll out ClusterClass changes to existing Cluster in a controlled/incremental fashion.
- Roll out ClusterClass changes to all the existing Cluster immediately.

The first strategy is the recommended choice for people starting with ClusterClass; it
requires the users to create a new ClusterClass with the expected changes, and then
[rebase](#rebase) each Cluster to use the newly created ClusterClass.

> By splitting into separated step the change to the ClusterClass change and its roll-out

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By splitting the change to the ClusterClass and its rollout
```

> By splitting the change to the ClusterClass and its rollout
> to Clusters into separated steps the user will reduce the risk of introducing unexpected
> changes on the existing Clusters, or at least limit the blast radius of those changes
> to a small number of Clusters already rebased (in fact it is similar to a canary deployment).

Reviewer 2: nit 
```suggestion
By splitting the change to the ClusterClass and its rollout
to Clusters into separate steps the user will reduce the risk of introducing unexpected
changes on existing Clusters, or at least limit the blast radius of those changes
to a small number of Clusters already rebased (in fact it is similar to a canary deployment).
```

> The second strategy listed above instead requires to change a ClusterClass "in place", which can
> be simpler and faster than creating a new ClusterClass, but this approach
> implies that changes are immediately propagated to all the Clusters already using the 
> ClusterClass being changed; any operation impacting many Clusters has intrinsic risks,
> and it can impact heavily on the underlying infrastructure in case the operation triggers 
> machine rollout across the entire fleet of Clusters.

Reviewer 2: nit
```suggestion
The second strategy listed above instead requires changing a ClusterClass "in place", which can
be simpler and faster than creating a new ClusterClass. However this approach
means that changes are immediately propagated to all the Clusters already using the modified
ClusterClass. Any operation impacting many Clusters has intrinsic risks,
and it can impact heavily on the underlying infrastructure in case the operation triggers 
machine rollout across the entire fleet of Clusters.
```

> machines roll out across the entire fleet of Clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
machine rollouts across the entire fleet of Clusters.
```

> However, no matter of which strategy you are choosing for implementing your changes to a ClusterClass, 

Reviewer 2: nit 
```suggestion
However, no matter which strategy you are choosing for implementing your changes to a ClusterClass, 
```

please make sure to:

- Understand what [Compatibility Checks](#compatibility-checks) are and how to prevent changes
  that can lead to non-functional Clusters.

> - [Dry running ClusterClass changes](#dry-running-clusterclass-changes) before applying them.

Reviewer: Q: Absolutely up to you, but should we also only refer to  "planning ClusterClass changes", etc vs calling it dry run?
(across the doc)

> If instead you are interested in understanding more about which kind of  
> effects you should expect on the Clusters, or if you are interested in additional details 
> about the internals of the topology reconciler you can start reading the notes in the 
> [planning-clusterclass-changes](#planning-clusterclass-changes) documentation or looking at the [reference](#reference)

Reviewer 2: nit 
```suggestion
If instead you are interested in understanding more about which kind of  
effects you should expect on the Clusters, or if you are interested in additional details about the internals of the topology reconciler you can start reading the notes in the [Planning ClusterClass changes](#planning-clusterclass-changes) documentation or looking at the [reference](#reference)
```

documentation at the end of this page.

## Changing ClusterClass templates

> Templates are an integral part of a Cluster Class, and thus the same considerations
> described in the previous paragraph apply; that means that when you are changing
> a template referenced in a ClusterClass users should also always plan for how the
> change should be propagated to the existing Clusters and choose the strategy that best
> suits their expectations.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Templates are an integral part of a ClusterClass, and thus the same considerations
described in the previous paragraph apply. When changing
a template referenced in a ClusterClass users should also always plan for how the
change should be propagated to the existing Clusters and choose the strategy that best
suits expectations.

```

> suite their expectations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
suits their expectations.
```

> Then, according to the [Cluster API operational practices](../../updating-machine-templates.md),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
According to the [Cluster API operational practices](../../updating-machine-templates.md),
```

will adapt to them at the next reconciliation, but the system is not watching for those 
specific changes. That means that when the underlying template is updated in this way the changes 
may not be reflected immediately, but it will be put in place at the next full reconciliation. 
The maximum time for the next reconciliation to take place is related to the CAPI controller
sync period - 10 minutes by default.

</aside>

<aside class="note warning">
<h1>Reusing templates across ClusterClasses</h1>

As already discussed in [writing a cluster class](write-clusterclass.md), technically it is possible to 
re-use a template across ClusterClasses, but this practice is not recommended because it makes it more
complex to reason about the impact that any change on such a template can have on existing Clusters.

</aside>

Also in case of changes to the ClusterClass templates, please make sure to:

- Understand what [Compatibility Checks](#compatibility-checks) are and how to prevent changes
  that can lead to non-functional Clusters.
- [Planning ClusterClass changes](#planning-clusterclass-changes) before applying them.

> And eventually learn more about this reading the notes in the [planning-clusterclass-changes](#planning-clusterclass-changes) documentation or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can learn more about this reading the notes in the [Planning ClusterClass changes](#planning-clusterclass-changes) documentation or
```

looking at the [reference](#reference) documentation at the end of this page.

## Rebase

Rebasing is an operational practice for transitioning a Cluster from one ClusterClass to another,
and the operation can be triggered by simply changing the value in `Cluster.spec.topology.class`.

Also in this case, please make sure to:

- Understand what [Compatibility Checks](#compatibility-checks) are and how to prevent changes
  that can lead to non-functional Clusters.
- [Planning ClusterClass changes](#planning-clusterclass-changes) before applying them.

> And eventually learn more about this reading the notes in the [planning-clusterclass-changes](#planning-clusterclass-changes) documentation or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can learn more about this reading the notes in the [Planning ClusterClass changes](#planning-clusterclass-changes) documentation or
```

looking at the [reference](#reference) documentation at the end of this page.

## Compatibility Checks

When changing a ClusterClass, the system validates the required changes according to
a set of "compatibility rules" trying to prevent changes which would lead to a non-functional
Cluster, like e.g. changing the InfrastructureProvider from AWS to Azure.

If the proposed changes are evaluated as dangerous, the operation is rejected.

<aside class="note warning">
<h1>Warning</h1>

In the current implementation there are no compatibility rules for changes to provider
templates, so you should refer to the provider documentation to avoid
potentially dangerous changes on those objects.

</aside>

For additional info see [compatibility rules](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/main/docs/proposals/202105256-cluster-class-and-managed-topologies.md#clusterclass-compatibility)
defined in the ClusterClass proposal.

## Planning ClusterClass changes

It is highly recommended to always generate a plan for ClusterClass changes before applying them,

> no matter of you are creating a new ClusterClass and rebase Clusters or if you are changing

Reviewer 2: nit
```suggestion
no matter if you are creating a new ClusterClass and rebasing Clusters or if you are changing
```

your ClusterClass in place.

The clusterctl tool provides a new alpha command to do this operation, [clusterctl alpha topology plan](../../../clusterctl/commands/alpha-topology-plan.md).

The output of this command will provide you all the details about how those changes impact
on the Clusters, but the following notes can help you to understand what you should 
expect when planning your ClusterClass changes:

> - User should expect the resources in a Cluster (e.g. MachineDeployments) to behave consistently

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Users should expect the resources in a Cluster (e.g. MachineDeployments) to behave consistently
```

>   no matter if a change is applied via a ClusterClass or directly as you do in a Cluster without
>   a ClusterClass; in other words, if someone changes something on a KCP object triggering a
>   control plane Machines rollout, you should expect the same to happen when the same change
>   is applied to the KCP template in ClusterClass.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  no matter if a change is applied via a ClusterClass or directly as you do in a Cluster without
  a ClusterClass. In other words, if someone changes something on a KCP object triggering a
  control plane Machines rollout, you should expect the same to happen when the same change
  is applied to the KCP template in ClusterClass.
```

> - User should expect the Cluster to change consistently no matter of how the change has been
>   applied to the corresponding ClusterClass; in other words, if you change a field "in place" in
>   a ClusterClass used by a Cluster or if you rebase your Cluster to a new ClusterClass with
>   the same field changed, the effects on the Cluster are the same.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Users should expect the Cluster to change consistently no matter how the change has been
  applied to the corresponding ClusterClass. In other words, if you change a field "in place" in
  a ClusterClass used by a Cluster or if you rebase your Cluster to a new ClusterClass with
  the same field changed, the effects on the Cluster are the same.
```

- Users should expect the Cluster topology to change consistently irrespective of how the change has been

>   applied to the ClusterClass. In other words, if you change a template field "in place",  orif you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  applied to the ClusterClass. In other words, if you change a template field "in place",  or if you
```

> - User should expect the Cluster topology to change consistently no matter of how the change has been
>   implemented inside the ClusterClass; in other words, if you change a template field "in place", if you 
>   rotate the template referenced in the ClusterClass by pointing to a new template with the same field 
>   changed, or if you change the same field via a patch, the effect on the Cluster are the same.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Users should expect the Cluster topology to change consistently no matter of how the change has been
  implemented inside the ClusterClass; in other words, if you change a template field "in place", if you 
  rotate the template referenced in the ClusterClass by pointing to a new template with the same field 
  changed, or if you change the same field via a patch, the effect on the Cluster are the same.
```

> - User should expect the Cluster topology to change consistently no matter of how the change has been
>   implemented inside the ClusterClass; in other words, if you change a template field "in place", if you 
>   rotate the template referenced in the ClusterClass by pointing to a new template with the same field 
>   changed, or if you change the same field via a patch, the effect on the Cluster are the same.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Users should expect the Cluster topology to change consistently irrespective of how the change has been
  applied to the ClusterClass. In other words, if you change a template field "in place", or if you 
  rotate the template referenced in the ClusterClass by pointing to a new template with the same field 
  changed, or if you change the same field via a patch, the effects on the Cluster are the same.
```

| workers.machineDeployments[].infrastructure.ref | If the referenced template has changes only in metadata labels or annotations, the corresponding InfrastructureMachineTemplates are updated (in place update). <br /> <br />If the referenced template has changes in the spec:<br />  -  Corresponding InfrastructureMachineTemplate are rotated (create new, delete old).<br />  -  Corresponding MachineDeployments objects are updated with the reference to the newly created template (in place update). <br />  - The corresponding worker Machines are updated accordingly (rollout) |

### How the topology controller reconciles template fields

> Advanced users might be interested in understanding how the topology reconciler
> enforces the values defined in the ClusterClass templates into the topology owned 
> objects in a Cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The topology reconciler enforces values defined in the ClusterClass templates into the topology owned objects in a Cluster.
```

A simple way to understand this is to `kubectl get -o json` templates referenced in a ClusterClass;
then you can consider the topology reconciler to be authoritative on all the values

> under `spec`. Being authoritative means that the user cannot change manually those values in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
under `spec`. Being authoritative means that the user cannot manually change those values in
```

> the object derived from the template in a specific Cluster (and if he does so the value gets reconciled

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the object derived from the template in a specific Cluster (and if they do so the value gets reconciled
```

to the value defined in the ClusterClass).

<aside class="note">

> <h1>What about patches</h1>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<h1>What about patches?</h1>
```

> The considerations above apply also when using patches, with the only difference that the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The considerations above apply also when using patches, the only difference being that the
```

authoritative fields should be determined by applying patches on top of the `kubectl get -o json` output. 

</aside>

A corollary of the behaviour described above is that it is technically possible to change non-authoritative

> fields in the object derived from the template in a specific Cluster, but we advise to use the possibility 
> to do ad-hoc changes in generated objects only as workaround, while instead it should always be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
fields in the object derived from the template in a specific Cluster, but we advise against using the possibility 
or making ad-hoc changes in generated objects unless otherwise needed for a workaround. It is always
```
nit: To enforce that we don't recommend doing direct changes. Feel free to ignore if you prefer the current wording.

> fields in the object derived from the template in a specific Cluster, but we advise to use the possibility 
> to do ad-hoc changes in generated objects only as workaround, while instead it should always be
> preferable to improve ClusterClasses by supporting new Cluster variants in a reusable way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
fields in the object derived from the template in a specific Cluster, but  ad-hoc changes in generated objects should only be made as workaround. It should always be
preferable to improve ClusterClasses by supporting new Cluster variants in a reusable way.
```

# Changing a ClusterClass

## Selecting a strategy

When planning a change to a ClusterClass, users should always take into consideration
how those changes might impact the existing Clusters already using the ClusterClass, if any.

There are two strategies for defining how a ClusterClass change rolls out to existing Clusters: 

- Roll out ClusterClass changes to existing Cluster in a controlled/incremental fashion.
- Roll out ClusterClass changes to all the existing Cluster immediately.

> The first strategy is the recommended choice for people starting with ClusterClass; it

Reviewer: Just a general comment (I think we don't have to change anything because of that):

In my opinion it's good to keep sentences relatively short (max 1,5-2 lines) because then they are easier to digest/understand for readers. A sentence just becomes harder to understand when there are multiple "subordinate clauses" (googled that word, I hope it fits :)). (Not trying to mandate a hard upper limit, at some point sentences just feel too long to me, usually when I have to reread the sentence to figure out how the clauses fit together)

Usually it's relatively easy to split a long sentence in two (I'm trying to do this everywhere since somebody told me that issue)

Author: that's a good suggestion!
I like the direction where this is going, but sometimes is hard to follow

Reviewer: Yup absolutely :)

requires the users to create a new ClusterClass with the expected changes, and then
[rebase](#Rebase) each Cluster to use the newly created ClusterClass.

By splitting into separated step the change to the ClusterClass change and its roll-out
on the Clusters the user will reduce the risk of introducing unexpected changes on the
existing Clusters, or at least limit the blast radius of those changes
to a small number of Clusters already rebased (in fact it is similar to a canary deployment).

The second strategy listed above instead requires to change a ClusterClass "in place", which can

> be simpler and faster that creating a new ClusterClass, but this approach

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be simpler and faster than creating a new ClusterClass, but this approach
```

implies that changes are immediately propagated to all the Clusters already using the 
ClusterClass being changed.

> While this is powerful, users should be well aware of the risk that an operation impacting

Reviewer: I have a hard time parsing this sentence, maybe we can split it in two or there is just a word missing.

Author: re-phrased, hopefully now it is better

many Clusters and the same time imply and how this could percolate to the underlying infrastructure
in case the operation triggers machines roll out across the entire fleet of Clusters.

However, no matter of which strategy you are choosing for implementing your changes to a ClusterClass, 
please make sure to:

> - Understand what [Compatibility Checks](#Compatibility Checks) are and how to prevent changes

Reviewer: In the local book (make serve-book) this was not rendered as a link. 
(same for the link in the next bullet point)

Author: fixed

  that can lead to non-functional Clusters.
- [Dry running ClusterClass changes](#Dry running ClusterClass changes) before applying them.

> If instead you are interested in understanding more about how which kind of  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If instead you are interested in understanding more about which kind of  
```

effects you should expect on the Clusters, or if you are interested in additional details 
about the internals of the topology reconciler you can start reading the notes in the 
[dry run](#Dry running ClusterClass changes) documentation or looking at the [reference](#Reference)
documentation at the end of this page.

## Changing ClusterClass templates

Templates are an integral part of a Cluster Class, and thus the same considerations

> described in the previous paragraph applies; that's means that also when you are changing
> a template referenced in a ClusterClass users should always plan for how the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
described in the previous paragraph apply; that means that when you are changing
a template referenced in a ClusterClass users should also always plan for how the
```

change should be propagated to the existing Clusters and choose the strategy that best

> suite the expectation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
suits their expectations.
```

> Then, according to the [Cluster API operational practices](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/tasks/updating-machine-templates.html),

Reviewer: Can we make this a relative link? (so that it also works on versioned versions of the book)

specific changes. That means that when the underlying template is updated in this way the changes 
may not be reflected immediately, but it will be put in place at the next full reconciliation. 
The maximum time for the next reconciliation to take place is related to the CAPI controller
sync period - 10 minutes by default.

</aside>

<aside class="note warning">
<h1>Reusing templates across ClusterClasses</h1>

As already discussed in [writing a cluster class](write-clusterclass.md), technically it is possible to 
re-use a template across ClusterClasses, but this practice is not recommended because it makes it more
complex to reason about the impact that any change on such a template can have on existing Clusters.

</aside>

Also in case of changes to the ClusterClass templates, please make sure to:

- Understand what [Compatibility Checks](#Compatibility Checks) are and how to prevent changes
  that can lead to non-functional Clusters.
- [Dry running ClusterClass changes](#Dry running ClusterClass changes) before applying them.

And eventually learn more about this reading the notes in the [dry run](#Dry running ClusterClass changes) documentation or

> looking at the [referece](#Reference) documentation at the end of this page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
looking at the [reference](#Reference) documentation at the end of this page.
```

## Rebase

Rebasing is an operational practice for transitioning a Cluster from one ClusterClass to another,

> and the operation can be triggered by simply changing the value in `cluster.spec.topology.class`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the operation can be triggered by simply changing the value in `Cluster.spec.topology.class`.
```

> Also in this case, please make sure to:

Reviewer: This reads a bit repetitive as we have (if I saw correctly) the same block 3 times. 
If you see a good way to deduplicate or otherwise mitigate the issue, it would be nice.

Otherwise just leave it as is, we probably can't emphasize that point enough :)

Author: The first instance of this sentence is more detailed, the next two repetitions are shortened, but the intent was to stress the relevance of that point

Reviewer: Absolutely fine.

- Understand what [Compatibility Checks](#Compatibility Checks) are and how to prevent changes
  that can lead to non-functional Clusters.
- [Dry running ClusterClass changes](#Dry running ClusterClass changes) before applying them.

And eventually learn more about this reading the notes in the [dry run](#Dry running ClusterClass changes) documentation or
looking at the [referece](#Reference) documentation at the end of this page.

## Compatibility Checks

When changing a ClusterClass, the system validates the required changes according to

> a set of "compatibility rules" trying to prevent changes to leading to a non-functional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a set of "compatibility rules" trying to prevent changes which would lead to a non-functional
```

Cluster, like e.g. changing the InfrastructureProvider from AWS to Azure.

If the proposed changes are evaluated as dangerous, the operation is rejected.

<aside class="note warning">
<h1>Warning</h1>

> In the current implementation there are no compatibility rules for provider's
> template changes, so you should refer to the provider documentation for avoiding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the current implementation there are no compatibility rules for changes to provider
templates, so you should refer to the provider documentation to avoid
```

potentially dangerous changes on those objects.

</aside>

For additional info see [compatibility rules](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/main/docs/proposals/202105256-cluster-class-and-managed-topologies.md#clusterclass-compatibility)
defined in the ClusterClass proposal.

## Dry running ClusterClass changes

> It is highly recommended to always dry run ClusterClass changes before applying this,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is highly recommended to always dry run ClusterClass changes before applying them,
```

> no matter of you are creating a new ClusterClass and rebase Clusters or if you ara changing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
no matter of you are creating a new ClusterClass and rebase Clusters or if you are changing
```

your ClusterClass in place.

> The clusterctl tool provides a new alpha command to do this operation, [clusterctl alpha topology plan](../../../clusterctl/commands/tbd.md).

Reviewer: The document & link is already there (see index.md)

The output of this command will provide you all the details about how those changes impact

> on the Clusters, but the following notes can help you in understand what you should 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on the Clusters, but the following notes can help you to understand what you should 
```

expect when planning your ClusterClass changes:

- User should expect the resources in a Cluster (e.g. MachineDeployments) to behave consistently

>   no matter if a change is applied via a ClusterClass or directly as you do in Cluster without

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  no matter if a change is applied via a ClusterClass or directly as you do in a Cluster without
```

>   a ClusterClass; in other words, if someone changes something on KCP object triggering a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  a ClusterClass; in other words, if someone changes something on a KCP object triggering a
```

>   control plane Machines roll out, you should expect the same to happen when the same change

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  control plane Machines rollout, you should expect the same to happen when the same change
```
nit (rollout is the noun, roll out the verb)

| workers.machineDeployments[].bootstrap.ref      | If the referenced template has changes only in metadata labels or annotations, the corresponding BootstrapTemplates are updated (in place update).<br /> <br />If the referenced template has changes in the spec:<br />  -  Corresponding BootstrapTemplate are rotated (create new, delete old). <br />  - Corresponding MachineDeployments objects are updated with the reference to the newly created template (in place update). <br />  - The corresponding worker machines are updated accordingly (rollout)                        |
| workers.machineDeployments[].infrastructure.ref | If the referenced template has changes only in metadata labels or annotations, the corresponding InfrastructureMachineTemplates are updated (in place update). <br /> <br />If the referenced template has changes in the spec:<br />  -  Corresponding InfrastructureMachineTemplate are rotated (create new, delete old).<br />  -  Corresponding MachineDeployments objects are updated with the reference to the newly created template (in place update). <br />  - The corresponding worker Machines are updated accordingly (rollout) |

> ### How topology controller reconcile template fields

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How the topology controller reconciles template fields
```

Advanced users might be interested in understanding how the topology reconciler do
enforce the values defined in the ClusterClass templates into the topology owned 
objects in a Cluster.

A simple way to understand this is to `kubectl get -o json` templates referenced in a ClusterClass;

> then you can consider the Topology reconciler to be reconciler to be authoritative on all the fields

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then you can consider the Topology reconciler to be authoritative on all the fields
```

Reviewer: + Let's pick lower or upper case for Topology reconciler/controller (cf. with section header)

that set under `spec`, where being authoritative means that the user cannot change those values in

> the object derived from the template in a specific Cluster (and if he does so the value get reconciled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the object derived from the template in a specific Cluster manually (and if he does so the value gets reconciled
```
maybe, to make it 100% clear
